Monster Hunter is a great series that many players have sunk hundreds, even thousands of hours into. However, the combination of challenging gameplay, daunting amounts of knowledge required to fully understand the game, and occasionally poor in-game tutorials, they have a recurring problem with easing new players into the franchise. With the upcoming release of Monster Hunter: World in mind, Heaven's Mount aims to provide a starting point for new and interested players, as well as be a helpful guide for hunters who are still looking to improve their game.

While the size of this guide might appear overwhelming at first, it is important to keep in mind that Monster Hunter is a fairly deep game, and not everything needs to be understood right away. In other words, you don't need to read a book before playing; you can enjoy the game for what it is, and come here when you wish to learn more about the game, or simply need help dealing with a particular monster.

** Would I enjoy Monster Hunter? What kind of game is it?
Monster Hunter is a pure action game, but with an emphasis on preparation. This means that a lot of your time will be spent hitting a monster with a weapon, while doing your best to avoid its attacks; however, crafting better weapons, armor, consumable items, and learning details of a monster's behaviour and environment are also all important parts of hunting, and together create the game's core experience. 
If you intend to play solo, Monster Hunter can also be seen as a greatly challenging game that requires a large investment in order to properly learn, comparable to the learning curve of fighting games, which is why it's appealing to many people.
Some people that haven't played the series may hold misconceptions about what Monster Hunter is like, and I find myself obliged to dispell them. MonHun is not an RPG game, in the sense that it involves no personal stats or leveling up. Your character will never be stuck in a single play style, and while crafting provides a way of becoming stronger, the primary means of progression is simply getting better at playing the game. Monster Hunter also does not feature excessive grinding, at least not until the very end-game. Occasionally you will find it useful to hunt a monster multiple times while progressing but it is by no means the main substance of the game. It also does not feature an open world; quests are done in large but restricted areas that you leave after the monster you were hunting dies. Last but not least, Monster Hunter is, shockingly, *not* like Souls games, although obviously are people that love both series, and despite the obvious similarities in controls. Souls games focus on maintaining spatial awareness while exploring, and their combat rewards patience; Monster Hunter features relentless combat that emphasises positioning and rewards aggressiveness. 

** Am I going to be able to play this game?
While Monster Hunter is a challenging action game, it bears mentioning that it's more accessible than many other action titles. Almost every monster attack has such a long start-up that it is easy to react to everything that happens on the screen. When you get hit, it is almost always because you committed to an attack at a risky time in a bad position. The game also has almost no execution requirements, beyond the ability to manipulate a standard two-stick game controller, which is possible even for [some](https://www.reddit.com/r/MonsterHunter/comments/4zpjax/any_other_disabled_hunters_out_thereadvice/d6y6cxw/) people with disabilities.

** I've seen footage of people hunting in groups. Do I need friends to enjoy the game?
One of the great things about Monster Hunter is that it can be enjoyed both solo and in a group of up to 4 players. There are people that only ever play in one of these two ways, and it is entirely up to you what you will do. All quests in the game can be completed by a lone hunter, but you should keep in mind that such a journey can be counted as one of the most challenging experiences gaming has to offer.
This guide fully applies to both group and solo play, although as the game becomes considerably easier while playing with other people, you'll likely not need to worry about learning many of the advanced mechanics.

** How much time can I get out of this Monster Hunter?
A much better question would be, how much time can Monster Hunter get out of you? These games have easily hundreds of gameplay, and many players will keep playing essentially forever, as there's always more to do.

** Which Monster Hunter games should I play?
Even though this guide is driven by Monster Hunter: World coming out in early 2018, the series has a lot more to offer than just the most recent entry. Of the 3DS games, Monster Hunter 4 Ultimate has so far been considered the peak of the series in terms of gameplay and presentation, and will always be great to play, as well as a good game to try before World comes out. Monster Hunter Generations is also a fun game that's easier in solo play than 4 Ultimate and will have the most active online community until World comes out, but Generations has made some unusual gameplay changes that will for the large part not carry over into future iteration of the series, and may even teach bad habits to new players.
For those who do not have a 3DS but would still like to give the series a try, it is possible to emulate the english version of Monster Hunter Portable 3rd on PC, and even play it online, but this guide will not provide any further information on this topic. Monster Hunter Portable 3rd is also a great entry in the franchise, though it does not feature some quality of life improvements that were added in 4th generation games.
Although I do not recommend it for new players, for completeness' sake, I feel the need to mention Monster Hunter Freedom Unite. It is a 2nd generation Monster Hunter, playable on the PSP, and is by some considered an amazing game; however, many will find it too challenging or even frustrating to play. As it is an older game, it also doesn't include all of the modernizations of later games, and has a smaller selection of available weapons.

** Which games in the series does this guide apply to?
Eventually, all of them. As of right now, the information we have on Monster Hunter World are very limited, and as we get closer to release the guide will be updated to match World, and afterwards it will still try to mention version differences in cases where they're important.