Title: Hunt Basics
Slug: basics
Date: 10-10-2017 0:00
Chapter: basics
Template: guide

** Positioning
An important skill that contributes to a successful hunt, even more important than knowing when to attack, is knowing where to attack from. In other words, positioning is crucial in Monster Hunter; it is literally what makes the difference between a mediocre hunter and a good hunter. To position yourself means to keep yourself at a specific angle and distance relatively to the body of the monster. However, it effectively cannot be taught; the optimal positioning will be different for every monster, weapon, environment, situation, and even player.  
Every monster has a limited set of attacks; at any time, they can only take one of a few predetermined actions. Every attack that a monster can do will cover a specific area around them, and each of them will pose varying degrees of a threat to the hunter. The combination of all of these considerations leads to helping inform the player's decision of how they should position themselves. As a basic example, if you know that a monster has a dangerous charging attack that can start up quickly, it will be dangerous to stand right in front of that monster. However, it is important to keep in mind that this decision making is fluid; the risk of getting hit can be counterbalanced by the expected reward for repeatedly hitting a specific part - but not necessarily when your health is low, or you don't feel confident in your ability to dodge.
A basic tip that can be given, as it easily applies to many fights, is to stick close to the legs of a monster. Hitting the legs will often lead to the great reward of tripping them, and can entirely avoid many tail sweep, bite and charging attacks. You will still have to watch out for attacks that you might be vulnerable to such as hip checks, wing smashes and tail spins. Everyone is human, and no one can avoid all attacks forever; you have plenty of room for mistakes in Monhun, but with astute observation of the situation you'll be able to avoid a lot of unnecessary hits, and therefore attack a lot more often yourself.

** Learning Monster Movement
The primary component of getting better at positioning is observing the monster. What you'll need when starting out is a lot of patience, and paying close attention to how the monster moves at all times. By recognizing the animations and sounds a monster makes before a specific attack you'll learn how to dodge them - that is, knowing which way you should move to avoid it, understanding whether you should walk or roll(rolling consumes more stamina and can leave you vulnerable, which makes it preferable to not do it if you don't have to), or even recognizing when you don't have to move at all; with good positioning very often the monster's moves won't hit you at all, and will just create more opportunities for you to keep hitting.
Over time, if you observe monsters closely, you'll also figure out that there are patterns to their behaviour. Even though which attack the monster will use is mostly random, they still have tendencies in their attack sequences that you can learn and use to your advantage. A basic example is the fact that some monsters will extremely often tail spin twice, or even more times, in a row. Many beginner players often assume that it is safe to get close after the first tail spin, and get caught by the second one.
Your own positioning will also influence what the monster will do. A monster that sees many players at a large distance away from them will charge or fly more often than normal, which can also be abused to bait the monster into a trap.

** Beating the Timer
Every quest in Monster Hunter is timed, and has a time limit. While generally it is not a problem to complete most quests within the limit even if you play quite carefully, looking at your quest times can help you figure out how much can you improve. When you're just starting out you should ignore this as you focus on learning the game and the monsters, but the desire to improve your hunt times, especially if they're very bad(nearing the time limit), may drive you to wish to improve at the game.
One issue that you shouldn't let ruin your hunt times is failing to properly give chase. As the monster takes hits, it will every now and then run away to a different zone. Often it is enough to go in the same direction that it ran away to, but sometimes it'll disappear(by flying or burrowing underground) away to a completely different place on the map. Due to this you'll need to make sure that the monster is being tracked, so that you can always see its position and follow its movements. In games before World, this is accomplished with Paintballs, which you should always keep a few of, and make sure the monster is always marked with them during the hunt.

** Aggressiveness (Advanced)
While not getting hit is vital, something that can be less obvious to new players, but becomes of utmost importance in higher ranks, is the necessity to deal a lot of hits often. As a consequence of the mechanics of staggers, exhaust, limping, and enrage, which are explained in the Hunt Mechanics chapter, dealing a lot of damage provides a way of not just killing the monster, but also keeping his movement and aggression in check. In fact, since it is very hard to consistently avoid all attacks, at higher ranks the beginner tactic of dealing a few hits then running away will simply stop working, as it will end up in the hunter having to run away to heal much too often, while dealing barely any hits, and eventually running out the timer or dying. This is why the 'Hit it until it dies' internet meme is legitimately good advice; you need to hit it as much as it can, and that will help you succeed in more ways than you expect.

** Dealing with Walls
Whenever there's a monster that you just can't beat after multiple attempts, you will need to slow down and reconsider the way you're playing. This is the point of the entirety of the guide. Everything here is something that you should consult, make sure you understand, and apply, particularly in the Hunt Preparation and Mechanics sections. However, sometimes, when you believe you've learned as much about monster hunter's combat as you can, studied all data about the monster, re-examined all your item and equipment choices, you'll still be having trouble. This is where your mentality comes into play. 

** Challenge and Improvement
Beyond everything there is to learn about Monster Hunter, the fundamental thing you'll need is the right mentality. _Sometimes the game is just hard_. Especially as you hunt solo, in order to be able to succeed, you'll need to steel yourself with the will to keep trying, and apply your ability to actively learn. Make note of your mistakes, and look for more windows of opportunity to land attacks. Your mentality will be tested, and you'll feel rewarded if you can pull through.

